as the skin and tissue is dissected and
read raped on your abdominal wall some
fluid and blood collects under the skin
occasionally the fluid does not reabsorb
a collection of blood called a hematoma
or clear fluid called a seroma may need
to be drained postoperatively with a
separate and much smaller procedure this
usually is of no consequence to the
quality of your final result an excess
collection of blood and your surgically
dissected tissue is called a hematoma
this may require another operation to
drain and occasionally blood
transfusions frequently your surgeon
will place a small drain in the area to
remove fluid and allow a faster recovery
period the drain is easily removed in
the office within a week of surgery this
is an example of a drain which might be
used the small tube is placed in the
dissection area underneath the skin and
drains unwanted fluid into a container
or bulb on the outside of the body most
patients have some loss of sensitivity
in their abdominal skin however this
usually returns with time numbness or
discomfort could be permanent however
although great efforts are made to place
your belly button in the ideal location
malposition might occur and result in a
belly button which is off-center too
high or too low
when these skin flaps are elevated as
previously described the blood supply or
circulation to the skin is altered or
compromised this blood supply is
necessary to keep the skin alive and
allow ideal healing if an even more
significant compromise of the rerouted
blood supply such as with an infection
occurs poor wound healing possible wound
separation and even loss of skin and
tissue can result although uncommon it
is most likely to occur at the central
portion of the incision or the belly
button there are many variables that
could further compromise the blood
supply and diminish healing ability
smoking reduces blood flow and adversely
affects healing excessive tension on the
skin from the closure excessive
post-operative activity infection and
the presence of previous surgical scars
can diminish blood flow and adversely
affect healing if liposuction is
performed on the abdominal or flank area
at the same time as the tummy tuck
the risk is significantly increased
because of the extra trauma in the
unlikely event a small portion of skin
did not live such as this there would be
prolonged healing most likely including
frequent dressing changes and a
revisional procedure permanent
deformities can occur these procedures
are also more risky in those that smoke
are obese or have associated medical
problems such as diabetes it is best to
optimize your medical health prior to
the procedure to increase your chances
of a smooth recovery incisions always
result in scars which heal unpredictably
based on the previously discussed
variables although they usually heal
well and are an excellent trade-off for
the benefits of the procedure sometimes
they can heal poorly and cause
discomfort and anxiety here are examples
of how variably scars heal on the top
are scars which have healed poorly and
are obviously very noticeable on the
bottom our scars which have healed
better and are less conspicuous because
of the associated relative inactivity of
the healing period
there is also an unlikely but slightly
higher risk of developing blood clots in
the legs rarely these blood clots or
clots of fat can travel in the blood
stream to the lungs this is called
pulmonary emboli zation these events can
lead to the need for hospitalization and
occasionally shock and death in the most
severe instances precautions taken
during surgery such as placement of
compression stockings significantly
lower the risk of this rare complication
a return to activities such as careful
walking soon after surgery also
decreases these risks it is extremely
important to go over these and other
risks with your surgeon and have your
general health evaluated other
complications can result from any
surgery resulting in permanent
deformities need for expensive
revisional surgery hospitalization and
even death the rate and severity vary
with different surgeons their experience
and the medical health considerations of
each patient you should discuss all
these issues and related financial
obligations and responsibilities with
your plastic surgeon prior to surgery
and abdominoplasty should usually be
performed under a general anesthesia the
time it takes to perform the procedure
varies among surgeons and with the
extensiveness of the procedure
post-operative instructions also vary
with surgeons and should be carefully
followed to increase the likelihood of a
favorable result generally sutures need
to be removed and your surgeon will need
to carefully monitor the healing process
and evaluate for the development of any
potential complications major tummy
tucks often require a prolonged recovery
period with significant limitation of
activities the post-operative discomfort
and recovery time do vary from patient
to patient but most patients don't get
back to a desk job before several weeks
or regular activity before 1 to 3 months
you will increase your chances of a
better scar and less problematic wound
healing if you keep tension off your
incision as it heals this is best
accomplished by walking bent over with
the aid of a walker and keeping flexed
at the waist as shown here for about 10
days following your surgery sitting in a
chair as much as possible and lying in
bed with your legs and back flexed also
keeps the incision area soft and tension
free you should try to avoid lying down
flat or standing up straight for even an
instant for the first 10 days it is
important that you follow your surgeon's
instructions very carefully and show up
for all your scheduled appointments the
next video segment follows the pre and
post-operative course of a patient who
will undergo a tummy tuck or
abdominoplasty procedure